---
layout: post
title:  "Debug"
date:   2015-1-19 08:49:46
categories: hollistics code
---

Bugs are aspects of your products that diminish them from what they may be if said bugs didn't exist.

There are bugs in your code.  They could be causing repeated system crashes and costing millions ($), causing the odd visitor to shake their head and click away or simply causing a server somewhere to run a bit hotter and push bits to no avail.  They may trigger alerts that wake you up at 2am, 30 minutes after you went to bed, demanding resolution or they may work their mischeif upon your users and ecosystem unbeknownst to you for years slowly chiseling away at the image you project.

Some bugs are in your face.  We've preempt them bugs with linters, programmatically identify emergent ones with tests, analyze out their potential huddled tight in code reviews, and deftly resolve them with our tools of choice.

These yellers, however, are the vanguard of an ever varying stream of challenges that wait patiently until you've reached a comfort level then spring out and present challenges that you previously had no basis to comprehend.  Luckly for us, this is a magnificent thing that offers us the opportunity to continually grow throughout a life of work.  

Through work as an engineer we develop a sense that alerts us to every unfortunate software pattern, ill conceived coded concept, negligent gap in understanding or blatant typo in your code.  We find that code we've written doesn't do well under load, crashes in an environment, does not meet requirements or handle edge cases, or simply doesn't work for a staggering array of reasons.  

We develop a sense that becomes ingrained in us through the pain of debugging, the enbarrasment of falling on our face when doing it live,  the reflexive dissasotiation with code we've written long ago (or last week), the reinforcement of our choices of style, pattern and languge when things get rough, and the abject horror of showing our code to other engineers who we perceive as better than us.  It's a sense that creates those nagging thoughts that something is wrong as you launch your code or try to sleep.  It is in cohoots with your guts, twisting them around and producing more acid than is required to digest your 12 cup a day coffee diet.  It has tendrils deep into the psychological machinacions that allow us to get anything done by putting aside what's not pefect, the voice on our shoulder that holds what we know needs to be done but cannot deal with now and the chemistry of ulcers.

Bugs bug us through this sensitivity.  Cultivating this sensitivity is the cultivation of your potential as an engineer.  Ignoring or discrediting this sense leads to plateaing and possibly decline. 

Engineering is a blend of science and production.  What we do is made possible by the reality of our hardware/software/cultural ecosystems, which are sublime: they offer more complexity than any of us can comprehend and more potential for wonder than any of our adrenal glands can produce in our short lives.  Every time we sit down to code we meet this reality head on.  We practice our skills and give our ideas a go and, when we look around at the end of the day all bug-eyed having cast our last spark of focus, there is something new there.  It's code in an IDE, a binary on a server, a shift in network traffic and cpu usage, a change in data in a database, a change in the look, feel, or functionality of a webpage, app or other interface, it's the ping of engagement with the end users that may take away entertainement, eduction, efficiency, social connection or entropy.  

We build things that are amazing.  We are shaping the world more rapidly and unpredictibly than any other movement in history.  We try ourselves against the world.  The things we create is friction of our efforts against the potentiality of reality.  The potentiality of our reality as engineers is unprecidentely vast.  We must not take this for granted, but at the same time we can't let this turn to hubris.  We must recognize when the results of our action are other than our intention or when our intentions are based on an understanding that we've deprecated.

A peak in an engineer's refinement of her sense of bugyness leads to a peak in the level of work.  Perpetual progress is a pipe dream.  When I am moved to improve my game, the greatest catalysts I've found is to reflect openly on what I've done to feel the nuances of my past bugs so that I can more adeptly intend then execute what may next be.